1   /   60  HQPlayer ™   Desktop  User Manual  Version 5.7.3  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

2   /   60  Streaming partners  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

3   /   60  Table of Contents  1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 5  1.1. DSDIFF and DSF playback, DSD sources and playback .......................................... 5  1.2. Architecture and components ..................................................................................... 5  1.3. Starting up the application .......................................................................................... 6  1.4. Network Audio ............................................................................................................. 6  2. Main screen ........................................................................................................................ 7  2.1. Album / track art .......................................................................................................... 7  2.2. Track display ............................................................................................................... 7  2.3. Song display ............................................................................................................... 8  2.4. Time display ................................................................................................................ 8  2.5. Limiting ........................................................................................................................ 8  2.6. Apodization ................................................................................................................. 8  2.7. Mode display ............................................................................................................... 8  2.8. 20 kHz filter ................................................................................................................. 8  2.9. Adaptive gain mode .................................................................................................... 8  2.10. Control buttons ......................................................................................................... 9  2.11. Convolution ............................................................................................................... 9  2.12. Phase inversion ........................................................................................................ 9  2.13. Repeat and Random playback ................................................................................. 9  2.14. Playlist management ................................................................................................ 9  2.15. Volume control .......................................................................................................... 9  2.16. Position/seek bar .................................................................................................... 10  2.17. Source content entry ............................................................................................... 10  2.18. Playback content table ........................................................................................... 10  3. Library management ........................................................................................................ 11  4. Settings ............................................................................................................................ 13  4.1. Inputs ........................................................................................................................ 14  4.2. Outputs ..................................................................................................................... 14  4.3. PCM .......................................................................................................................... 16  4.4. SDM .......................................................................................................................... 21  4.5. Filter / Oversampling selection ................................................................................. 25  4.6. Advanced .................................................................................................................. 34  5. Channel balance .............................................................................................................. 37  6. Convolution engine .......................................................................................................... 39  7. Matrix processing ............................................................................................................. 41  7.1. Plugins ...................................................................................................................... 44  7.2. “delay” plugin ............................................................................................................ 44  7.3. “iir” plugin .................................................................................................................. 44  7.4. “riaa” plugin ............................................................................................................... 45  8. HQPlayer Client ............................................................................................................... 46  8.1. Switching views ........................................................................................................ 49  8.2. Album selection view ................................................................................................ 50  8.3. Playlist edit view ....................................................................................................... 51  9. Registering your copy ...................................................................................................... 53  10. Troubleshooting .............................................................................................................. 54  10.1. Reporting bugs ....................................................................................................... 54  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

4   /   60  10.2. Sound problems with USB audio device ................................................................ 54  10.3. Generic ................................................................................................................... 54  10.4. No rates available ................................................................................................... 55  11. Component licenses and trademarks ............................................................................ 56  11.1. HQPlayer ................................................................................................................. 56  11.2. FLAC ....................................................................................................................... 57  11.3. WavPack ................................................................................................................. 58  11.4. mpg123 ................................................................................................................... 58  11.5. ASIO ........................................................................................................................ 59  11.6. Qt ............................................................................................................................. 59  11.7. libmicrohttpd ............................................................................................................ 59  11.8. bs2b ........................................................................................................................ 59  11.9. Botan ....................................................................................................................... 60  11.10. Trademarks ........................................................................................................... 60  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

5   /   60  1.   Introduction  HQPlayer is a high quality audio player for 64-bit Windows, Linux and macOS.  HQPlayer also features several user selectable high quality resamplers as well as user  selectable dither/noise shaping algorithms and delta-sigma modulators.  Some of the more affordable sound cards and D/A converters have suboptimal digital  and analog filters, while still having support for higher sampling rates. Effect of this can  reduced by applying high quality upsampling in software before feeding the signal to  the audio hardware at higher rate. This moves some of the artifacts of the suboptimal  hardware to higher frequencies, away from the audible band. Many of the home-  theater amplifiers and digital (room correction) processors also re-sample internally to  48, 96 or 192 kHz, with the HQPlayer, these can be fed at the native rate avoiding  lesser quality resampling in the device.  Most modern D/A converters are delta-sigma type. Built-in delta-sigma modulator of  HQPlayer allows using DSD-capable converters with this native data format, in many  cases bypassing lot of DSP processing in these converters and allowing more direct  data path to the conversion stage. For select set of DACs, also correction profiles are  available to improve correctness of the output signal.  Resampling also allows playback for high resolution audio files on hardware capable  of only lower sampling rates or bit depths. For lower bit depth playback, high quality  dither or noise shaping can be employed.  HQPlayer also includes a convolution engine for applying digital room correction filters  or other kinds of equalization.  These features ensure the best possible audio quality with the available audio  hardware.  1.1.   DSDIFF and DSF playback, DSD sources and playback  Playback of DSDIFF and DSF files is supported. In addition, playback from other DSD  sources such as ADCs and network streams is supported. In case hardware and  drivers support ASIO or ALSA DSD -mode, or one of the “PCM packed” modes, these  files can be played back in native format.  For devices capable of only PCM input, PDM (pulse density modulation) content of  these files is converted to 176.4 (64 fs ), 352.8 (128 fs )   or 705.6 kHz (256 fs ) PCM (pulse  code modulation) format for playback through PCM audio hardware. The playback rate  of DSD sources can be further altered by using resampling to chosen rate. Thus,  playback rates from 32 to 1536 kHz are possible. Used bit depth is either maximum  supported by the playback hardware or lower in case such is requested.  Also multichannel loudspeaker delay- and level-processing is supported in both  converted and native modes.  1.2.   Architecture and components  HQPlayer Desktop consists of client-server architecture. Both components have some  GUI elements, but the server side – the actual HQPlayer Desktop -application contains  mostly elements for maintaining configuration and basic playback functionality based  on drag-and-drop or simple source folders and audio inputs. Client implements actual  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

6   /   60  player GUI, but not any standalone playback functionality.  1.3.   Starting up the application  First the HQPlayer Desktop main application (server) needs to be started and running  somewhere in the network. Then HQPlayer Client can be started either in the same  machine, or in some other machine in the network. Available HQPlayer servers  (HQPlayer Desktop or HQPlayer Embedded) are shown in the client. Or in case  automatic discovery fails, or is not supported, hostname or IP address of the server  can be entered in order to connect to the server.  1.4.   Network Audio  Network Audio is a way to have remote audio adapters and DACs integrated  seamlessly with the player application. All the audio processing is performed at the  player application side, and then streamed asynchronously over the network for  reproduction.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Network Audio system

7   /   60  2.   Main screen  When the application is first started up, main screen is displayed.  User interface also supports standard multimedia keys and equivalent remote controls.  Tracks, directory trees and playlist files can be added to the current playlist by drag-  and-drop from outside of the application.  Note!   In case you experience clicks/pops between DSDIFF/DSF tracks, creating a  playlist for the tracks enables special code to reset the modulation state. Playback  won't be gapless in this mode.  2.1.   Album / track art  When content includes album or track artwork, it is shown when a track is being  played.  2.2.   Track display  Current track number and total number of tracks on a transport is shown on this  display. For CD, this is the normal track number. For files, track numbering is  constructed per directory basis based on embedded track number or file name sorting  order. For preferred order, file names should begin with correct zero-prefixed track  number.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Main screen

8   /   60  2.3.   Song display  For CD, this field is used only to display track numbers.  When playing back files, metadata is shown. If metadata is not available a file name is  shown.  2.4.   Time display  This display shows the selected time information. By default, it is the time from  beginning of the track. Other possible values are time from end of the track and total  time from end of the album (transport).  2.5.   Limiting  HQPlayer contains automatic soft-knee limiter that will reduce volume on respective  channels when output exceeds 0 dB level. When limiting is triggered, the “Limited”  counter is incremented and volume knob color changes to red. When such happens, it  is best to reduce output level and keep the lowered volume level to avoid further  triggers of limiting.   Note!   Limiting sensitivity depends on selected filter and  upsampling ratio.  2.6.   Apodization  For PCM source content, HQPlayer can detect need for an apodizing filter. This is  based on detected errors that originate from the recording ADC or mastering tools.  Every time such occasion is detected in source content, the counter is incremented.  When such content is detected, especially with higher counts, use of apodizing filter is  recommended. This detection is not absolute, but can be used   as   guidance to decide  when non-apodizing filter shouldn’t be used. There is no harm in using apodizing filter  for content that doesn’t need one. But there is harm using non-apodizing filter for  content that would need one.  2.7.   Mode display  Selected time display mode is indicated here. Shown values are “time” for the time  from beginning of the track, “remain” for the time from end of the track and “total  remain” for the time from end of the album. Display mode can be changed by clicking  this box.  2.8.   20 kHz filter  20 kHz low-pass filter can be used to clean up ultrasonic noise and distortion from  PCM sources. For example from previously upsampled content, such as fake HiRes.  This filter is functional only for 2x and higher source rates. Filter used for the purpose  is very high performance one, optimized for time-frequency performance while  providing fast and steep attenuation for frequencies above 20 kHz.  2.9.   Adaptive gain mode  Apply adaptive gain settings during playback based on metadata, such as ReplayGain  2.0 specification. Note that in case metadata includes positive gain values, you may  need to provide extra headroom using volume control setting.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

9   /   60  2.10.   Control buttons  Control buttons can be used to control playback. Clicking “Play” begins the process  and “Stop” will stop the process. For normal file playback other buttons can be used as  well.  2.11.   Convolution  When this button is depressed, convolution processing is completely bypassed. When  this button is pressed, convolution engine is active and the configured impulse  responses will be used to process the signal before resampling. Convolution can be  enabled and disabled during the playback. This applies only when simple convolution  engine is used. Matrix processor settings can be changed on the fly using matrix  profiles.  Note!   When source material sampling rate differs from the impulse sampling rate,  impulse responses will be scaled to the source material's sampling rate. This can have  a huge impact on CPU/GPU load, and with large impulse responses will require  significant amount of CPU/GPU processing power.  2.12.   Phase inversion  Absolute phase can be inverted in cases where volume control is available.  2.13.   Repeat and Random playback  Current tracklist/playlist can be repeated and played back in random order. It is also  possible to repeat a single track. When output is to a file, resulting output matches the  playback.  2.14.   Playlist management  Clicking the “Clear playlist” -button clears the internal playlist transport. If some other  transport (such as album) is active, this doesn't have visible effect until new playlist is  created. Playlist can be also loaded and saved using corresponding buttons.  When other transport than playlist is selected, playlist is still in memory. Transport can  be switched back to the playlist by clicking the “Activate playlist” button.  2.15.   Volume control  Processing volume can be controlled through volume multimedia keys or remote  control, or by operating this adjustment wheel. Selected dither/noise-shaping algorithm  has significant impact on quality of this adjustment.  When using any resampling, maximum recommended volume level is -3 dBFS to  avoid inter-sample overloads, and in case material contains digital clipping/limiting.  Note!   High oversampling ratios can generate high inter-sample overs. Overloading the  delta-sigma modulator in SDM mode will also cause audible noises. It is therefore  recommended to keep software volume at max -3 dB setting or lower when using  PCM to SDM conversion to avoid overloads, especially if the source material contains  digital clipping. Maximum modulation depth is monitored and when necessary limited  to 50% to retain best possible output fidelity.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

10   /   60  2.16.   Position/seek bar  Shows relative playback position of a currently playing song while also allowing seeks  to arbitrary position within the song.  2.17.   Source content entry  Source content edit / drop-list contains reference to the source location. References  are URI’s, just like web browser address bar. When source is a “transport” like a folder  or audio device, all content is assumed to belong together and is processed gapless.  When source is not a folder, but instead individual files for example dropped on  HQPlayer window, pop-prevention processing is employed between DSD tracks,  assuming the tracks are independent.  To source audio from a device, “audio:” and “input:” URI schemas are used.  To read content from a CD, “cd:” URI schema is used.  Browse button next to the edit box can be used to browser for a source folder.  Note!   On macOS, in order to enable audio input to HQPlayer, permission to access  “Microphone” needs to be granted to HQPlayer in System Preferences → Security &  Privacy. On Windows, similarly Desktop applications must be granted access to  “Microphone” in order to use input feature.  2.18.   Playback content table  Table shows content loaded in transport for playback.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

11   /   60  3.   Library management  To edit library, open the “File” menu and select “Library...”. Following dialog will be  shown.  List shown on the left is the list of album locations available on the transport selector.  Each path is intended to represent an album consisting of files of same number of  channels.  To remove an album from the listing, select the album path and click “Remove” button.  Once you are done with the editing, select either “OK” to save your changes or  “Cancel” to discard the changes.  It is also possible to edit album metadata by double-clicking a cell.  To (re-)scan an entire directory tree or part of it, click “Scan...” to browse and select  base directory of the tree you wish to add and click “OK”. All the nodes of the directory  tree with recognized content will be added to the list of available albums and  new/changed cover art is recognized. Already known entries are automatically ignored  (except for adding missing metadata). If you wish to refresh all the library information,  select “Clean scan...” instead. Select “Structure only” to extract metadata solely from  the directory tree structure instead of metadata embedded in files. If detached cover  art is missing, but embedded cover art exists, “Extract covers” will extract embedded  cover art to a detached one making it available in the cover flow view. Cover art cannot  be extracted if “Structure only” is selected, as this omits looking into embedded  metadata information.  Metadata for each path is loaded when available. If metadata is not available within  the file, it is constructed from the full file path, assumed of being in format  Artist/Album/Song.  Note!   Each directory is assumed to contain only one type of supported playback files,  the first recognized type will be used and other types of files within the directory will be  ignored.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Library editing dialog

12   /   60  To clear the list, select “Remove all”, confirmation dialog will appear before the list is  cleared.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

13   /   60  4.   Settings  To change program's device settings, open the “File” menu and select “Settings...” (on  macOS “Preferences...” from the application menu).  Content of the device selection depends on the selected back-end.  For WASAPI and CoreAudio driver types, used audio endpoint (device) can be  selected by using the “Device” selection which lists all the available audio endpoints in  addition to the default endpoint, which is the one selected in Windows Control Panel or  macOS Audio MIDI Setup for the default audio output.  For ASIO driver type, used audio device can be selected by using the “Device”  selection which lists all the available ASIO devices. “Ch. offset” can be used to select  the channel which is considered to be the first in channel mapping (0-based).  For Network Audio driver type, list of remote audio devices is shown on the “Device”  selection. This always combination of the NAA device plus the hardware device ID.  On Linux, ALSA audio endpoint (device) can be selected by using the “Device”  selection which lists all the available hardware audio endpoints.  DSD content can be transferred to/from the audio device by packing it into suitable  PCM container, select “DoP” to use the DoP v1.1 standard. The “2wire” setting  enables dual-wire channel bonding to achieve 2x higher sampling rates for both PCM  and DoP-based DSD on those DACs that support this feature.  Short buffer setting reduces size of audio FIFO buffer to half. This reduces amount of  delay for example for volume control. But it also increases likelihood of audio drop-  outs.  Channel mapping is following (regardless of driver type):  0.   Front Left  1.   Front Right  2.   Front Center  3.   Low Frequency (LFE)  4.   Back Left  5.   Back Right  6.   Side Left  7.   Side Right  Length of the hardware audio buffer (in milliseconds) can be changed by using “Buffer  time” selection. It is recommended to use “Driver default”, unless audio drop-outs are  experienced. When “Driver default” is used, the audio driver defines length of the  buffer. In case of WASAPI, this is more or less fixed value of 10 ms. In case of ASIO,  this can be usually controlled through ASIO control panel. With ASIO backend it is  recommended to leave the value to “Default” and adjust buffer size from the driver  Control Panel instead, if available. When ASIO Control Panel is not available, the  HQPlayer setting can be used, but it will be capped to the range supported by the  driver, and in some cases this means the setting not having any effect if the driver  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

14   /   60  doesn't allow adjustments at all. Values between 10 and 100 ms are most  recommended.  Note!   Due to limitations of ASIO API, ASIO drivers cannot be used for both input and  output. Combination of ASIO and WASAPI or ASIO and NAA can be used instead.  4.1.   Inputs  On Inputs tab, different input device related settings can be changed.  If you don’t have any input device, select “[none]” as the input backend.  On Windows, drive letter for the CD drive can be changed from the “CD drive”  selection. On Linux, device node for the CD drive can be entered, this can be typically  a symlink such as “/dev/cdrom”. On macOS, device node can be discovered using  terminal command “ drutil status ”, where for example if   Name   is “/dev/disk5” the device  node to be entered is “/dev/ r disk5”.  4.2.   Outputs  On Outputs tab, audio output device related settings can be changed.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings dialog, Inputs tab

15   /   60  Number of output channels can be chosen from “Channels” selection, possible  choices range from “2” for stereo to 128 output channels, primarily for complex matrix  processing cases.  Default output mode  Selects default output mode. When set to “PCM”, all content is played as PCM output.  When “SDM (DSD)” is selected, all content is played as SDM output. When “[source]”  is selected, PCM content is played as PCM and DSD content is played as SDM.  However, using “[source]” usually leads to sub-optimal result with either format since  only very few DACs have separate true PCM (R2R) and SDM conversion sections  inside. In most cases only either one of the options is optimal for the DAC.  Quick pause  Quick pause changes pause operation to play only basic silence pattern. In some  cases this reduces delay when pressing pause. But can cause audible glitches  especially when DAC is directly connected to a power amp without intermediate  analog volume control.  Adaptive rate  Adaptive output rate makes automatic output rate selection pick sampling rates based  on two different rules; grayed selects default or lower rate based on filter and DAC  capabilities, while checked selects rate that is multiple of the same base sampling rate  as the source. When the setting is not checked, specified output sampling rate is fixed.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings dialog, Output tab

16   /   60  Volume control  It is also possible to configure adjustment range of the volume control. When both  values are set to zero (0), volume control is bypassed completely (see note below).  Fixed volume setting can be achieved by setting both min and max to the same value.  PCM gain compensation  Due to nature of DSD, many DACs have different output levels for 0 dBFS PCM vs 0  dB DSD. PCM gain compensation can be used to compensate for this level difference.  DAC type   Compensation (dB)  Asahi Kasei Micro (AKM), AK4490   -3.5  Asahi Kasei Micro (AKM), AK4493   -1 to -3.5 depending on  reference level settings  Asahi Kasei Micro (AKM), AK4499   -4.1  Asahi Kasei Micro (AKM), AK4499EX   -3 depending on  settings  Cirrus Logic   -3  ESS Sabre   0  Texas Instruments / Burr-Brown   Depends on selected  AFIR, refer to the  datasheet for details  Holo Audio   -6  Denafrips   -3.2  Merging Hapi   -0.6  4.3.   PCM  On PCM tab, settings for PCM output mode can be controlled.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

17   /   60  For filter settings, please see a separate section below.  Sample rate / Limit  Output sample rate request, or limit can be set in “Sample rate”. This is the maximum  output rate HQPlayer will use.  This selection can be used to switch between supported hardware sample rates.  Available choices depend on selected transport and resampling filter type. When  default output mode is set to “[source]”, or “Adaptive output rate” is enabled, t his is  only a default and upper limit for output rate, specific rate is selected by the playback  engine during playback time depending on available rates and filter conversion  capabilities. When default output mode is PCM, and “Adaptive output rate” is not  enabled, the selected rate is static output rate.  Note!   When “none” is selected as resampling algorithm, output sampling rate is  adjusted based on source file's sampling rate. For DSD sources, this is 1/16th of the  DSD rate.  Noise-shaping / dither  This selection can be used to switch between different word-length reduction  algorithms. It is always recommended to use at least TPDF dither.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings dialog, PCM tab

18   /   60  NS/Dither   Description  none   No noise-shaping or dithering, only rounding. Mostly suitable for  testing cases together with   none   filter selection, where   bit-perfect  output is needed.   Not recommended.  NS1   Simple first order noise-shaping. Sample values are rounded and the  quantization error is shaped such way that the error energy is pushed  to the higher frequencies. Suitable mostly for 176.4/192 kHz  upsampling.  NS4   Fourth order noise-shaping. Similar in shape as “shaped” dither.  Suitable for all rates equal or higher than 88.2 kHz.  NS5   Fifth order noise-shaping. Fairly aggressive noise-shaping designed  for 8x and 16x rates (352.8/384/705.6/768 kHz). Not recommended for  rates below 192 kHz. (Especially good for PCM1704 at those highest  rates.)  NS9   Ninth order noise-shaping. Very aggressive noise-shaping designed  especially for 4x rates (176.4/192 kHz) and recommended for these  rates. (Especially good for older 16-bit 4x rate capable multibit-DACs  like TDA154x etc.)  LNS15   15 th   order linear noise shaping. Smooth noise-shaping slope designed  especially for 16x rates (705.6/768 kHz) and recommended for these  higher PCM rates. Can be also used at 8x rates (352.8/384 kHz), but  not recommended for rates below.  RPDF   Rectangular Probability Density Function. White noise dither.  Computationally light weight, but only suitable for 24-bit or higher  output hardware.  TPDF   Triangular Probability Density Function. This is the industry standard  simple dither mechanism. Suitable for any rate and recommended if  playback rate is 44.1/48 kHz.   Recommended for general purpose use.  Gauss1   Gaussian Probability Density Function. High quality flat frequency  dither recommended for rates at or below 96 kHz where noise-shaping  is not suitable.  shaped   Shaped dither. Noise used in this dither has shaped frequency  distribution to lower audibility of the dither noise. Suitable for playback  rates of 88.2/96 kHz, or higher.  Note!   Use of “NS1” with equipment sensitive to ultrasonic noise is not recommended.  Bits  When DAC is connected to a unidirectional interface like S/PDIF, AES/EBU or I2S it is  important to select correct number of bits from the “DAC bits” selection. In addition,  when a DAC is connected to USB and has something else than 32-bit input resolution,  it is recommend to set the actual value here.  For Holo Audio and Denafrips R2R DACs, setting Bits to 20 is recommended. Also  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

19   /   60  when a suitable noise-shaper, such as LNS15, NS9 or NS5 is used in combination  with high output rates, linearity errors inherent to all R2R DACs can be corrected. This  will lower distortion of especially low level signals and reduce zero-crossing disortions.  DSD sources  These settings control DSD to PCM conversion algorithms.  Different types of noise filters for PCM are provided. These reduce amount of  ultrasonic noise present in the source data. Standard filtering leaves low level of  ultrasonic noise. Some loudspeakers with tweeters of low power handling capability  can be sensitive to this noise, especially when higher listening volumes are used. Also  some poorly designed, or class-D, amplifiers can misbehave in presence of such  ultrasonic content. Therefore more aggressive noise filters can be selected by using  “Noise filter” drop list. These filters will also limit bandwidth available for the audio  content. Following filters are supported.  When processing output rate of DSD source (assuming DSD64) is 88.2/96 kHz PCM,  use of extra noise filtering in addition to “standard” is less important, since most of the  noise will be cut out. When processing output rate of DSDIFF or DSF source is  44.1/48 kHz, extra noise filtering in addition to “standard” is not needed and will  actually just reduce playback quality.  PCM Noise filter   Description  standard   Standard noise filter will be applied.  Recommended.  low   Similar to standard, but has lower corner  frequency and results in almost flat noise  profile in ultrasonic range.   Recommended.  high-order   High order noise filter designed for material  created with high order modulators.  Recommended.  sac   Sliding average converter.  wec   Weighted element converter.  wec2   Weighted element converter. Optimized to  closely match DSD/SACD specification.  Non-ringing linear-phase.   Recommended.  slow-lp   Slow roll-off linear-phase filter.  slow-mp   Slow roll-off minimum-phase filter.  medium   Medium roll-off linear-phase filter designed  to be as gentle as possible while passing  minimal amount of out-of-band noise.  Recommended.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

20   /   60  medium-high   Medium roll-off high reate linear-phase filter  designed to be as gentle as possible while  passing minimal amount of out-of-band  noise. Use this instead of “medium” when  “none” is selected as PCM Conversion.  Recommended.  fast-lp   Fast roll-off linear-phase filter.  fast-mp   Fast roll-off minimum-phase filter.  brickwall   Brickwall filter that doesn’t pass any out-of-  band noise. Very steep linear phase filter.  Cut-off at 25 kHz for DSD64, 50 kHz for  DSD128, 100 kHz for DSD256, 200 kHz for  DSD512 and 400 kHz for DSD1024.  Type of SDM → PCM conversion can be selected from the “Conversion” drop list.  Following conversion types are supported.  PCM Conversion   Description  traditional   Traditional recursive conversion algorithm.  Minimizes amount of ringing by using slow  roll-off filters.  single-steep   Single-pass conversion algorithm with steep  roll-off.  single-short   Single-pass conversion algorithm with  normal roll-off. Optimized tradeoff between  ringing and wide frequency response.  sinc-S   Linear-phase adaptive length sharp roll-off  and high attenuation single pass conversion  algorithm. Number of taps is 65536.  sinc-M   Linear-phase million-tap sharp roll-off and  high attenuation single pass conversion  algorithm.  poly-lp   Linear-phase single-pass conversion  algorithm.  poly-mp   Minimum-phase single-pass conversion  algorithm.  poly-short-lp   Linear-phase slow roll-off single-pass  conversion algorithm.   Recommended.  poly-short-mp   Minimum-phase slow roll-off single-pass  conversion algorithm.  poly-xtr   Linear-phase extreme roll-off and  attenuation single-pass conversion  algorithm.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

21   /   60  PCM Conversion   Description  poly-xtr-short   Linear-phase extreme roll-off and  attenuation single-pass conversion  algorithm.  poly-ext2   Linear-phase extended frequency response  sharp roll-off and high attenuation single-  pass conversion algorithm.  poly-gauss-long   Linear-phase Gaussian extremely high  attenuation single-pass conversion  algorithm. Optimal time-frequency  response.  none   No decimation, intermediate output rate is  equal to source DSD rate.  DSDIFF or DSF file should typically have 6 dB of headroom on the signal level. By  selecting “6 dB gain” check box, 6 decibels of gain is applied, removing this headroom  from the converted signal. This way the normal playback level reaches that of normal  PCM. However, this may cause overloads with some source material and may require  extra attenuation using volume control.  4.4.   SDM  On SDM tab, settings for SDM output mode can be controlled.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

22   /   60  For oversampling settings, see separate section below.  Modulator  Allows selection of the delta-sigma modulator used to produce SDM output.  Modulator   Description  DSD5   Rate adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator.  DSD5v2   Revised fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator.  DSD5v2  256+fs  Revised fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator optimized for rates  >= 10.24 MHz.  DSD5EC   Rate adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation.  ASDM5   Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator.  ASDM5EC   Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation.  ASDM5ECv2   Second generation of ASDM5EC with minor improvements.  ASDM5ECv3   Third generation of ASDM5EC with minor improvements.  ASDM5EC-  ul  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Ultralight version.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings dialog, SDM tab

23   /   60  Modulator   Description  ASDM5EC-  light  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Light version.  ASDM5EC-  super  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Super version.  ASDM5EC-  ul 512+fs  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Ultralight version.  ASDM5EC-  light 512+fs  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Light version.  ASDM5EC-  super 512+fs  Adaptive fifth order one-bit delta-sigma modulatro with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Super version.  DSD7   Seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator.  DSD7  256+fs  Seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator optimized for rates >=  10.24 MHz.  ASDM7   Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator.  ASDM7EC   Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation.  ASDM7ECv2   Second generation of ASDM7EC with minor improvements.  ASDM7ECv3   Third generation of ASDM7EC with minor improvements.  ASDM7EC-  ul  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Ultralight version.  ASDM7EC-  light  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Light version.  ASDM7EC-  super  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Super version.  ASDM7EC-  ul 512+fs  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Ultralight version.  ASDM7EC-  light 512+fs  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Light version.  ASDM7EC-  super 512+fs  Adaptive seventh order one-bit delta-sigma modulatro with extended  compensation. Optimized for 512x and higher rates. Super version.  AMSDM7  512+fs  Special adaptive seventh order “pseudo-multi-bit” modulator optimized  for rates above >= 20.48 MHz.  AMSDM7EC  512+fs  Special adaptive seventh order “pseudo-multi-bit” modulator with  extended compensation for rates >= 20.48 MHz.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

24   /   60  Modulator   Description  AHM5EC5L   Experimental fifth order five level hybrid modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for rates >= 40.96 MHz.  Note!   Limited SNR compared to other modulators, best suited for  loudspeaker system and/or when digital volume control is not needed.  Not recommended when HQPlayer’s volume control is the primary  volume control method.  AHM7EC5L   Experimental seventh order five level hybrid modulator with extended  compensation. Optimized for rates >= 40.96 MHz.  Note!   Limited SNR compared to other modulators, best suited for  loudspeaker system and/or when digital volume control is not needed.  Not recommended when HQPlayer’s volume control is the primary  volume control method.  Fifth order modulators are more suitable for DACs that have simple analog  reconstruction filters. Seventh order modulators provide better technical performance,  but also put more demands on the DAC's analog reconstruction filter. Typically this  means that fifth order modulators suit DACs that have one switching element while  seventh order modulators have potential for better performance on DACs that have  multi-element switching arrays. DSD* modulators are fixed configuration ones while  ASDM* modulators are adaptive in various ways based on source signal. For ESS  Sabre based DACs, fifth order modulators are recommended. For most other DACs,  seventh order modulators are optimal.  Integrator  There are three types of delta-sigma integrators available for different SDM → SDM  remodulation schemes. These affect mostly frequency and phase response at highest  frequencies. Stated frequencies apply for DSD64 source rate, these frequencies scale  as function of source sampling rate.  SDM Integrator   Description  IIR   Normal IIR type integrator structure. 50 kHz  audio bandwidth re DSD64.  IIR2   IIR type integrator structure designed to  minimize residual noise. 25 kHz audio  bandwidth re DSD64.  IIR3   High order IIR type integrator structure. 30  kHz audio bandwidth re DSD64.  FIR   Weighted FIR type integrator structure.  FIR2   Weighted FIR type integrator structure. 50  kHz audio bandwidth re DSD64.  FIR-bl   FIR type integrator structure with band-  limiting. 24 kHz audio bandwidth re DSD64  with complete cut by 45 kHz.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

25   /   60  FIR-bw   FIR type integrator structure with brickwall  band-limiting. 21.5 kHz audio bandwidth re  DSD64 with complete cut by 30 kHz.  CIC   Cascade comb type integrator structure.  Conversion  There are different options for SDM → SDM rate conversions. These affect frequency  aperture that is assumed to contain useful signal in addition to increasing noise  shaping noise. For example piano doesn’t contain high frequency harmonics and for  such case “narrow” is suitable, while close miked percussions usually contain high  level high frequency content and there “wide” may be more suitable. While “XFi” is  suitable for all cases. Default is “XFi”.  SDM Conversion   Description  wide   Wide bandwidth signal  narrow   Narrow bandwidth signal  XFi   Extreme fidelity medium bandwidth  DirectSDM  DirectSDM setting disables all processing when source is DSD content and output  format is SDM to a DSD-device or file.  Note!   Enabling DirectSDM will disable volume control and set PCM volume to fixed -3  dBFS value.  4.5.   Filter / Oversampling selection  This selection can be used to switch between PCM resampling / oversampling filters.  This selection has an impact on available hardware sampling rates. Different variants  of “poly-sinc” are the most recommended by the author. Filter/oversampling selection  for “1x” rates covers source sampling rates below 50 kHz, so called base rates. Filter  selection for “Nx” rates covers everything else above the 1x rates. Apodizing filter  should be used   at least   when “ Apod ” counter increments to higher than 10 during any  single track.  Filter   Description   Special  focus  Genre   Ratio   Ap  od  none   No sample rate conversion  happens. Only sample depth is  changed as needed.  1:1  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

26   /   60  IIR   This is analog-sounding filter,  especially suitable for recordings  containing strong transients, long  post-echo is a side effect (not  usually audible due to masking). A  really steep IIR filter is used. This  filter type is similar to analog filters  and has no pre-echo, but has a  long post-echo. Small amount of  pass-band ripple is also present.  Medium attenuation. IIR filter is  applied in time domain.  Pop, rock,  jazz, blues  Integer   X  IIR2   This is analog-sounding filter,  especially suitable for recordings  containing strong transients, long  post-echo is a side effect (not  usually audible due to masking). A  steep IIR filter is used. This filter  type is similar to analog filters and  has no pre-echo, but has a long  post-echo. Medium attenuation.  No passband ripple. IIR filter is  applied in time domain.  Pop, rock,  jazz, blues  Integer   X  FIR   Typical “oversampling” digital filter,  generally suitable for most uses  (slight pre- and post-echo), but  best on classical music recorded  in a real world acoustic  environment such as concert hall.  This is the most ordinary filter  type, usually present in hardware.  This filter is applied in time-  domain. It has average amount of  pre- and post-echo.  Classical   Integer   X  asymFIR   Asymmetric FIR, good for  jazz/blues, and other music  containing transients recorded in  real world acoustic environment.  Otherwise same as FIR, but with a  shorter pre-echo and longer post-  echo. Modifies phase response,  but not as much as minimum  phase FIR.  Jazz,  blues  Integer   X  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

27   /   60  minphaseFIR   Minimum phase FIR, good for  pop/rock/electronic music  containing strong transients such  as drums and percussion and  where recording is made in a  studio using multi-track  equipment. No pre-echo, but  somewhat long post-echo.  Pop, rock,  electronic  Integer   X  FFT   Technically good steep “brickwall”  filter, but might have some side  effects (pre-echo) on material  containing strong transients. This  filter is similar to FIR, but it is  applied in frequency-domain and  is quite efficient from performance  point of view while having rather  long impulse response.  Length of this filter can be  configured separately in Settings  dialog.  Any  depending  on length  2 x   X  poly-sinc-lp   Linear phase polyphase sinc filter.  Very high quality linear phase  resampling filter, can perform  most of the typical conversion  ratios. Good phase response, but  has some amount of pre-echo.  See “FIR” for further details.  Space   Classical   Any   X  poly-sinc-mp   Minimum phase polyphase sinc  filter, otherwise similar to poly-  sinc. Altered phase response, but  no pre-echo. See “minphaseFIR”  for further details.  Transie  nts  Jazz,  blues  Any   X  poly-sinc-shrt-  lp  Otherwise similar as poly-sinc, but  shorter pre- and post-echos at the  expense of filtering quality (not as  sharp roll-off).  Space,  transien  ts  Jazz,  blues,  electronic  Any   X  poly-sinc-shrt-  mp  Minimum phase variant of poly-  sinc-shrt. Otherwise similar to  poly-sinc-mp, but shorter post-  echo. Most optimal transient  reproduction.  Transie  nts  Pop, rock   Any   X  poly-sinc-long-  lp  Otherwise similar as poly-sinc, but  longer pre- and post-echos with  improved filtering quality (faster  roll-off).  Space   Classical   Any   X  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

28   /   60  poly-sinc-long-  ip  Intermediate phase version of  poly-sinc-long, with small pre-  echo and longer post-echo with  improved filtering quality (faster  roll-off).  Space,  transien  ts  Jazz,  blues,  electronic  Any   X  poly-sinc-long-  mp  Minimum phase variant of poly-  sinc-long. Otherwise similar to  poly-sinc-mp, but longer post-  echo with improved filtering quality  (faster roll-off).  Transie  nts  Pop, rock   Any   X  poly-sinc-hb   Linear-phase polyphase half-band  filter with steep roll-off and high  attenuation. Only suitable for  highest technical quality source  materials.  Any   Any  poly-sinc-hb-  xs  Extremely short linear-phase  polyphase half-band filter with  slow roll-off and low attenuation.  Only suitable for highest technical  quality source materials.  Pop, rock   Any  poly-sinc-hb-s   Short linear-phase polyphase half-  band filter with slow roll-off and  average attenuation. Only suitable  for highest technical quality  source materials.  Pop, rock   Any  poly-sinc-hb-m   Medium linear-phase polyphase  half-band filter with average roll-  off and medium attenuation. Only  suitable for highest technical  quality source materials.  Any   Any  poly-sinc-hb-l   Long linear-phase polyphase half-  band filter with fast roll-off and  high attenuation. Only suitable for  highest technical quality source  materials.  Classical,  jazz, blues  Any  poly-sinc-ext   Linear phase polyphase sinc filter  with sharper roll-off and somewhat  lower stop-band attenuation, while  being roughly equal length to poly-  sinc.  Integer   X  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

29   /   60  poly-sinc-ext2   Linear phase polyphase sinc filter  with sharp roll-off and high stop-  band attenuation for extended  frequency response while  completely cutting off by Nyquist  frequency. Optimal frequency  response and harmonic structure.  For SDM outputs, processing is  two stages with 16x intermediate  rate.  Timbre   Any   Any   X  poly-sinc-ext3   Very steep 8 times longer version  of poly-sinc-ext2. Optimal  frequency response and harmonic  structure.  Timbre   Classical   Any   X  poly-sinc-  mqa/mp3-lp  Linear phase polyphase sinc filter  optimized for playing back MQA or  MP3 encoded content in order to  clean up high frequency noise  added by the MQA or MP3  encoding. Also suitable for  upsampling PCM sources of 88.2  kHz or higher sampling rate,  especially for hires PCM  recordings of 176.4 kHz or higher  sampling rate. Very short ringing.  Early slow roll-off.  Transie  nts  Classical,  jazz, blues  PCM:  Integer  up  SDM:  Any  X  poly-sinc-  mqa/mp3-mp  Minimum phase variant of poly-  sinc-mqa.  Transie  nts  Pop, rock   PCM:  Integer  up  SDM:  Any  X  poly-sinc-xtr-lp   Linear phase polyphase sinc filter  with extreme roll-off and  attenuation.  Timbre   Classical   Any  poly-sinc-xtr-  mp  Minimum phase polyphase sinc  filter with extreme roll-off and  attenuation.  Timbre   Jazz,  blues  Any  poly-sinc-xtr-  short-lp  Short linear phase polyphase sinc  filter with extreme roll-off and  attenuation.  Timbre   Electronic,  jazz,  blues,  pop, rock  Any   X  poly-sinc-xtr-  short-mp  Short minimum phase polyphase  sinc filter with extreme roll-off and  attenuation.  Timbre   Pop, rock   Any   X  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

30   /   60  poly-sinc-  gauss-short  Short Gaussian polyphase sinc  filter. Optimal time-frequency  response. For SDM outputs,  processing is two stages with 16x  intermediate rate.  Transie  nts  Electronic,  jazz,  blues,  pop, rock  Integer  up  poly-sinc-  gauss  Gaussian polyphase sinc filter.  Optimal time-frequency response.  For SDM outputs, processing is  two stages with 16x intermediate  rate.  Transie  nts,  timbre  Any   Any   X  poly-sinc-  gauss-long  Long Gaussian polyphase sinc  filter with extremely high  attenuation. Optimal time-  frequency response. For SDM  outputs, processing is two stages  with 16x intermediate rate.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any   X  poly-sinc-  gauss-xl  Extra long Gaussian polyphase  sinc filter with extremely high  attenuation. Optimal time-  frequency response. For SDM  outputs, processing is two stages  with 16x intermediate rate.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Classical,  jazz, blues  Any  poly-sinc-  gauss-xla  Apodizing extra long Gaussian  polyphase sinc filter with  extremely high attenuation.  Optimal time-frequency response.  For SDM outputs, processing is  two stages with 16x intermediate  rate.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Classical,  jazz, blues  Any   X  poly-sinc-  gauss-hires-lp  Linear-phase Gaussian filter for  HiRes content with extremely high  attenuation. Optimal time-  frequency response. Also suitable  for playback of lossy compression  such as MP3 or MQA.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any   X  poly-sinc-  gauss-hires-ip  Intermediate-phase Gaussian filter  for HiRes content with extremely  high attenuation. Optimal time-  frequency response. Also suitable  for playback of lossy compression  such as MP3 or MQA.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any   X  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

31   /   60  poly-sinc-  gauss-hires-  mp  Minimum-phase Gaussian filter for  HiRes content with extremely high  attenuation. Optimal time-  frequency response. Also suitable  for playback of lossy compression  such as MP3 or MQA.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any   X  poly-sinc-  gauss-  halfband  Linear-phase halfband Gaussian  filter. Slightly leaky around  Nyquist, but extremely high  attenuation. Only suitable for  highest technical quality source  materials.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any  poly-sinc-  gauss-  halfband-s  Short linear-phase halfband  Gaussian filter. Leaky around  Nyquist, but high attenuation. Only  suitable for highest technical  quality source materials.  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Any   Any  ASRC   This is a special type of filter,  slightly similar to FIR, but with a  possibility of asynchronous  operation for conversions from  any rate to any other rate.  Computationally heavy and not  recommended.  Any  polynomial-1   Polynomial interpolation. No  apparent pre- or post-ringing.  Frequency response rolls off  slowly in the top octave. Poor  stop-band rejection and will thus  leak fairly high amount of  ultrasonic distortion. These type of  filters are sometimes referred to  as “non-ringing” by some  manufacturers.   Not  recommended.  Integer  up  polynomial-2   Similar to polynomial-1, but higher  stop-band rejection and only one  cycle of pre- and post-ringing.   Not  recommended.  Integer  up  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

32   /   60  minringFIR-lp   Minimum ringing FIR. Uses  special algorithm to create a  linear-phase filter that minimizes  amount of ringing while providing  better frequency-response and  attenuation than polynomial  interpolators. Performance and  ringing is between polynomial and  poly-sinc-short.  Transie  nts  Integer  up  minringFIR-mp   Minimum phase variant of  minringFIR.  Transie  nts  Integer  up  closed-form   Closed form interpolation with  high number of taps.  2 x   up  closed-form-  fast  Closed form interpolation with  lower CPU load, but also lower  precision. Output precision tuned  to match about 24-bit PCM.  2 x   up  closed-form-M   Closed form interpolation with one  million taps.  2 x   up  closed-form-  16M  Closed form interpolation with 16  million taps.  2 x   up  sinc-S   sinc -filter with adaptive number of  taps. Number of taps is   4096 x  conversion ratio . Very sharp roll-  off and high attenuation. Variant of  poly-sinc-ext3 .  Space,  timbre  Any   Integer   X  sinc-M   sinc -filter   with one million taps.  Very sharp roll-off and high  attenuation. Variant of   poly-sinc-  ext3 .  Space,  timbre  Classical,  jazz, blues  Integer   X  sinc-Mx   Constant time version of sinc-M.  Filter length is constant in time,  with million taps at 16x PCM  output rates. Variant of   poly-sinc-  ext3 . ( 65536 x conversion ratio)  Space,  timbre  Classical,  jazz, blues  Integer   X  sinc-MG   Gaussian constant time filter with  million taps at 16x PCM output  rates. Extremely high attenuation.  Variant of   poly-sinc-gauss-xl .  ( 65536 x conversion ratio)  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Classical,  jazz, blues  Integer  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

33   /   60  sinc-MGa   Apodizing Gaussian constant time  filter with million taps at 16x PCM  output rates. Extremely high  attenuation. Variant of   poly-sinc-  gauss-xla . ( 65536 x conversion  ratio)  Transie  nts,  timbre,  space  Classical,  jazz, blues  Integer   X  sinc-L   sinc -filter with adaptive number of  taps. Number of taps is   131070 x  conversion ratio . Extremely sharp  roll-off and average attenuation.  Classical   Integer  sinc-Ls   Average attenuation   sinc -filter with  adaptive number of taps ( 4096 x  conversion ratio ).  Any   Integer  sinc-Lm   Average attenuation   sinc -filter with  adaptive number of taps ( 16384 x  conversion ratio ).  Classical,  jazz, blues  Integer  sinc-Ll   Average attenuation   sinc -filter with  adaptive number of taps ( 65536 x  conversion ratio ).  Classical   Integer  sinc-short   Short average attenuation   sinc -  filter with adaptive number of taps.  For SDM outputs, processing is  two stages with 16x intermediate  rate.  Any   Any  sinc-medium   Average attenuation   sinc -filter with  adaptive number of taps. For SDM  outputs, processing is two stages  with 16x intermediate rate.  Classical,  jazz, blues  Any  sinc-long   Long average attenuation   sinc -  filter with adaptive number of taps.  For SDM outputs, processing is  two stages with 16x intermediate  rate.  Classical   Any  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

34   /   60  *-2s   Two stage oversampling. First  stage rate conversion is  performed by at least by factor of  8 using the selected algorithm.  And further converted to the final  rate using algorithm optimized for  conversion of content that has  already been processed to at least  8x rate. This lowers the overall  CPU load, while preserving the  same conversion quality.  Especially useful for highest  output rates.  Same  as the  base  filter  O  4.6.   Advanced  In the Advanced tab, various advanced settings such as hardware related  optimizations can be adjusted.  Multicore DSP  Multicore DSP increases parallelization of various DSP operations.  When the selection box is grayed, automatic detection and configuration is active and  can utilize any number of cores. For best performance it is recommended to use the  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings dialog, Advanced tab

35   /   60  auto-detection.  When the box is cleared, processing is optimized for cases where number of cores is  equal or less than number of output channels. Such as dual-core CPUs when output is  stereo.  When the box is checked, processing is optimized for modern multi-core CPUs with  much higher core count than number of output channels. Since this parallelization  increases processing overhead, it will increase total CPU time consumption. If there  are performance problems with “auto” setting, it is typically useful to try this option.  E-core allocation  On newer CPUs that have both performance and efficiency cores, efficiency cores can  be allocated as offload processors instead of normal (default) use. These e-cores can  be allocated either for processing resampling filters, or for a generic DSP pool for  performing other tasks such as convolution.  CUDA offload  “CUDA offload” can utilize nVidia GPU to partially offload the processing from CPU to  GPU. CUDA offload requires nVidia GPU with minimum   Compute Capability level 5.2 ,  2 GB of graphics RAM and latest official   nVidia drivers . When offload is enabled and  suitable GPU is available, message about the offload is briefly shown at the beginning  of playback of each track. When CUDA offload is enabled, also Multicore DSP should  be enabled, or left at automatic setting to achieve best performance.  When CUDA offload checkbox is grayed, only convolution algorithms are offloaded to  GPU.  Same or different GPU can be selected separately for performing filters and other DSP  tasks, and convolution and other large operations. This allows to split the workload  across two separate GPUs.  DSP pipelines  Specify number of DSP pipelines available. This is both number of matrix pipelines,  and total number of possible input or output channels. Using suitably low value  reduces resource consumption, such as RAM usage to some extent.  Blocks per cycle  Number of blocks to process at once. This setting can be used to fine tune CPU/GPU  load to lowest possible figure. When set to “Default” the value is auto-configured  based on detected amount of CPU cache etc. Processing more blocks at once  reduces overhead, especially when GPU is used. While processing fewer blocks at  once helps keeping most of the data in CPU cache. Higher values are better suited for  processors with large cache, such as AMD 3D-series and some Intel Xeon models, or  systems with high speed RAM. While smaller values are better suited for CPUs with  small cache, or systems with slower RAM.  Idle time  Defines amount of time the engine is left idling after playback of current content has  ended. This allows faster playback restart within the idle period.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

36   /   60  FFT filter length  This option specified length of the FFT filter. Default value is 512. Length affects  steepness of the filter, shorter lengths result in slower (gentler) roll-off, while higher  lengths result in faster (steeper) roll-off. This setting is per each 2x cascade filter, thus  it is not conversion ration dependent.  Pre-process before metering  When enabled, pre-processing, such as 20 kHz filter, is run before metering. This  allows one to see effect of the pre-process. But it may make it harder to detect when to  disable 20 kHz filter again.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

37   /   60  5.   Channel balance  For multichannel processing, speaker/microphone levels and distances can be  configured using Channel balance dialog. This dialog can be reached by opening  “Tools” menu and selecting “Channel balance...”.  In this dialog, distance to each individual speaker can be set in centimeters. Level of  the channel can be set using the volume slider and unit shown in upper right corner is  in dB. Allowed adjustment range using spinbox input is wider than range of the slider.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Speaker setup dialog

38   /   60  For adjusting speakers, pink noise test tone can be played by selecting the “Test tone”  box. When the box is checked, tone will be played in all channels, thus making it easy  to adjust all levels in such way that the they sound equal. When the box is grayed,  tone will be played one channel at the time in rotating manner, making it easy to adjust  all levels using an SPL meter.  Multichannel delay processing is done in target sampling rate. This increases  processing accuracy as the output sampling rate is increased.  This method is suitable for simplest per-channel level adjustment and is processed in  simpler and lighter way than full pipeline matrix.  Note!   Distance processing is available also for bit-perfect pass-through of DSD when  Direct SDM is enabled!  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

39   /   60  6.   Convolution engine  Convolution engine can be configured through the “Convolution” menu and selecting  “Engine setup...”.  Following dialog will be shown.  When “Enabled” option is checked, convolution engine is enabled at the application  level and enabled by default at the startup time. Enable this selection only after  selecting suitable impulse response files and if you are certain that your files contain  intended impulse response data.  Convolution algorithm can be changed from the “Convolution engine” selection. There  are two possibilities, “overlap-add” consumes less CPU power and is recommended.  Another alternative is “overlap-save” which consumes more CPU power.  To select impulse response files, “Browse...” button can be used. A normal file  selection dialog will be shown. After a file is selected, some preliminary checks for the  suitability is done and an error message is displayed in case of incorrect file details.  Left and right channels can have independent files.  When an impulse response file is selected through “Browse...”, it's estimated gain  function is calculated and displayed in “IR gain” box. This can help choosing suitable  value for “Gain compensation”. Also the default convolution engine can be selected.  When positive gain compensation is chosen, it is applied as negative gain when  convolution is disabled from the main screen. This makes it easier to compare impact  of the particular convolution setup.  When provided impulse response is lower sampling rate than source material, it's high  frequency response can be expanded to cover the new bandwidth by selecting  “Expand HF” setting.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Convolution engine setup dialog

40   /   60  Clicking “OK” will save the setting to the configuration file and the settings are ready  for use.  Convolution engine requires impulse responses to be mono RIFF (WAV) format files.  If some of the channels don't need processing, or are not used, clearing the filename  will disable convolution engine for those channels.  For most optimal case for all kinds of source material, use extended frequency  response convolution filters with 352.8 kHz sampling rate. When such are used,  Expand HF can be left disabled for all cases.  For example popular   Room EQ Wizard   can export suitable impulse responses after  designing for “Generic” equalizer by selecting File → Export → Filters Impulse  Response as WAV. Or more advanced tools like   rePhase   that can utilize Room EQ  Wizard measurements. Expert users can also use open source   DRC   tool for designing  even suitable full-band correction filters.  Note!   Use of long convolution filters for all eight channels of audio for hires audio files  will need substantial amount of CPU/GPU processing power!  Note!   It is not recommended to use convolution engine together with matrix  processor. When matrix processor is enabled, it is recommended to do convolution  there instead.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

41   /   60  7.   Matrix processing  Matrix processing offers a way to copy, route, filter and mix down channels with  specified gains. Matrix processing consists of maximum 128 virtual channels –  pipelines, number of active pipelines can be configured through advanced settings.  Note!   It is not recommended have both simple convolution engine (section 6) and  matrix processor active simultaneously. If convolution is needed with matrix  processing, it is recommended to configure convolution here.  For example the configuration shown above can be used to mix down 5.0/5.1 channel  material to stereo. As an example it also contains additional parametric equalizer  giving -3 dB attenuation of main channels above 200 Hz (not needed for multichannel  mix down use).  Combo box at the top is used to specify and select saved matrix configuration profiles.  These profiles can be also selected remotely. Currently shown values are saved as  default profile when OK is clicked.  Convolution engine applicable to filter(s) defined in   Process , can be selected from two  choices,   Overlap-add   which is the default and recommended and   Overlap-save   which  is alternative method. For filters using low sampling rate, frequency response of the  filter can be extended beyond Nyquist frequency of the filter’s sampling rate by  selecting   Expand HF . In addition, various plugin instances with parameters can be  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Matrix configuration dialog

42   /   60  specified in the   Process   item, as a comma-separated list.  Using the   IIR to FIR   it is possible to choose   whether parametric EQs are converted to  a convolution EQ. When the box is grayed, the conversion is a direct conversion and  retains original minimum phase response. When the box is checked, the EQ filter is  converted to a linear phase one.  In some cases, like GPU offloading, it may be more efficient to compute set of  parametric EQs as a convolution filter instead.  Note!   Conversion to linear phase will introduce some amount of unnatural pre-ringing  in the audio band. This is why EQ filters are typically minimum-phase. Higher the  parametric filter's Q and dB values are, more pre-ringing it will also introduce for linear-  phase. So the linear phase conversion works best with rather gentle EQ setups.  The “Source Ch” specifies the channel which is used as a source for the virtual  channel. “Gain” is overall gain applied for the virtual channel. And “Mix Ch” is the  logical output channel. When multiple virtual channels have the same target channel,  outputs of the virtual channels are mixed together to the target output channel.  “Process” can define external filter impulse response(s) WAV file for convolution,  parametric equalizer specification in   RoomEqWizard   text output format, and  parametric filter specifications (see Plugins section later). “ Browse ” button can be used  to select WAV and TXT files.  Gain can be applied in both dB scale or linear scale, as selected in the corresponding  column. Linear scale factors can be also negative to perform phase inversion, this  allows for example M/S processing.  When choosing format for convolution filters, for most optimal case for all kinds of  source material, use extended frequency response convolution filters with 352.8 kHz  sampling rate. When such are used, Expand HF can be left disabled for all cases.  Various headphone equalization files can be found from   AutoEq . Choose the  ParametricEQ txt file. This can be directly used in HQPlayer matrix processor without  modifications and also includes gain compensation data.  Post-processing algorithms can be enabled and configured in the table below the  pipeline routing matrix. These are applied to the output mix bus, meaning output  channels after the matrix processing.  Bauer cross-feed is processing for headphones that is intended to make the listening  experience more natural and spacious. This is very simple model, with three presets.  When custom preset is selected, cross-feed filter frequency ( Parameter 1 ) and level  ( Parameter 2 ) can be entered respectively.  Loudness is a volume-adaptive loudness control with adjustable parameters. For bass  and treble controls, the corner frequency, slope factor (see IIR plugin) and level can be  adjusted ( Parameter 1   to   Parameter 6   respectively) . Lower bound ( Parameter 7 )   is  volume setting where at or below, set maximum loudness value is reached. Higher  bound ( Parameter 8 ) is volume setting where at and above, loudness value reaches 0  dB.  Correction performs corrections for the output signal of selected DAC. These  corrections are   specific to a DAC model and output rate .  Clicking “ Plot ” button opens   magnitude - and phase response plots for the  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

43   /   60  corresponding pipeline. Multiple plots can be added by clicking the buttons as long as  the graph dialog is open. To reset the view, close the graph dialog.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Magnitude and phase response plot

44   /   60  7.1.   Plugins  Each plugin description begins with plugin name, followed by colon. After the color,  semicolon separated list of parameters can be specified.  Syntax is as follows:  <plugin>:[arg1[=val]];[arg2[=val]];...;[argn[=val]]  7.2.   “delay” plugin  Delay plugin provides specified amount of delay.  Argument   Description  s   Delay in number of samples at source rate  t   Delay in time, number of seconds  d   Delay in distance, number of meters  v   Velocity of sound, in m/s, default 343.956  7.3.   “iir” plugin  IIR plugin provides parametric EQ based on IIR biquad filters.  Type   Description   Arguments  lp   Low-pass filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   s= slope  lp1   1 st   order low-pass filter   f= frequency  hp   High-pass filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   s= slope  hp1   1 st   order high-pass filter   f= frequency  bp   Band-pass filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   bw= bandwidth  ap   All-pass filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   bw= bandwidth  notch   Notch filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   bw= bandwidth  peak   Peaking filter   f= frequency  q= Q   OR   bw= bandwidth  g= gain  lshelf   Low-shelf filter   f= frequency  q=Q   OR   s = slope  g= gain  hshelf   High-shelf filter   f= frequency  q=Q   OR   s= slope  g= gain  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

45   /   60  biquad   Raw biquad filter   b0= b0  b1= b1  b2= b2  a0= a0  a1= a1  a2= a2  Where   f   is in Hz,   BW   is factor,   s   is factor (1 maximum steepness) and   g   is in dB.  Note!   Syntax is case sensitive!  7.4.   “riaa” plugin  RIAA plugin provides RIAA EQ curve correction for vinyl playback. Currently plugin  provides only one adjustable parameter “ subsonic ” which is additional 20 Hz subsonic  filter pole, with values of “ 1 ” (enabled) and “ 0 ” (disabled). For best performance an  accuracy, use input sampling rate of 192 kHz or higher. Minimum recommended input  sampling rate is 96 kHz.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

46   /   60  8.   HQPlayer Client  When HQPlayer Client is started, following kind of screen is shown.  This display is optimized for touch-screens, but can be also used with a mouse or  other suitable pointing device.  On top left corner is server name/address entry and list, to connect to a server, either  select a server shown on the list or type in either hostname or IP address of the server.  On top right corner is list of inputs available on the server, such as CD transport and  possible ADC’s or digital inputs. This input field can be also used to send URLs for  playback, such as internet radio playlist or stream URLs.  Cover art of the current track is shown as a background image, when available. If track  doesn't have embedded cover art, album/folder cover image is used instead. If no  cover image is available, default background image is shown. Information about  current server, input and output buffer levels and current track is shown in the top left  corner of the screen.  Track-listing is shown in top-right corner of the screen with high-light of current track  and possibility to directly select a track. Volume adjustment is in the lower right corner  and can be adjusted by dragging from the the adjustment either up or down, or  alternatively by through slider control that can be opened by double-clicking the  volume control. Volume can be also operated using a mouse wheel when mouse  pointer is within the control.  Star-button can be used to control favorite status of the currently playing track.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  P lay view

47   /   60  Hotkeys  Client also supports various hotkeys for controlling playback and operation.  Key   Description  Play  PlayPause  Space  F8  Play/pause  Stop  F6  Stop  Previous  Left  F7  Previous track  Next  Right  F9  Next track  Rewind   Jump back 10 seconds  Forward   Jump forward 10 seconds  RandomPlay   Toggle random  Repeat   Toggle repeat  VolumeUp  Up  F12  Volume up +1  VolumeDown  Down  F11  Volume down -1  1  F1  Album view  2  F2  Play view  3  F3  Transport view (playlist editor)  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

48   /   60  Metering  Metering can be enabled using the M switch in the bottom toolbar. This will replace the  cover image view with meter display.  Left channel meters are shown on the left side, right channel meters on the right side.  In top left corner of each channel is shown   output level   meters, where yellow line  indicates peak hold level, dark green peak-to-peak level and light green RMS level.  Numerical values are also shown.  Underneath is spectrogram display with time on horizontal axis and frequency on  vertical access. Color coding is used to display signal level (in dB) in the time-  frequency space. Highest level in yellow and lowest in black. Red marker in frequency  scale shows base rate’s Nyquist frequency (highest possible), while yellow markers  show subsequent sub-band Nyquist frequencies.  20 kHz filter can also be switched on/off at any time, it is useful for cleaning up fake  high-res content when such is observed through metering. It will place a sharp roll-off  filter at 20 kHz.  Spectrogram color scheme can be changed from the control panel (see below).  Control panel  Additional settings can be accessed through menu-button (three horizontal lines) to  see following kind of popup.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Play view, metering

49   /   60  Currently active mode, filter, dither/noise-shaper and sampling rate settings can be  viewed and changed using the settings popup dialog. These can be changed at any  time. Matrix profile can be switched at any time during playback as well.  In addition, phase inversion, adaptive gain, repeat (checked = current track, grayed =  all tracks), random playback order and currently active matrix profile can be changed.  Verbose metadata replaces some of the output format information with more elaborate  metadata display of current track. Elide left (default) allows track names to be  shortened from left instead of right when they don’t completely fit in the view. Album  view can be sorted in ascending (grayed) or descending (checked) release year order.  In addition, transparency of album and transport views can be controlled. Background  option generates color themed background image based on the current cover picture.  Prefetch (default) begins streaming next track before currently playing track finishes to  ensure gapless playback. Freewheel (default) will fetch entire track at full speed. It is  not always optimal on slower network links because it causes sharp network traffic  floods that may interfere with other things.  Auto play is used on Qobuz service to continue playing similar content automatically,  after the currently queued items have been played.  Login credentials of currently active service can be cleared using the button at the  bottom of the view.  8.1.   Switching views  HQPlayer Client has three parallel views in horizontal direction. The view described  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Settings view

50   /   60  above is the middle one. Views can be switched by flick gestures to left or right,  clicking the title bars on left or right with a mouse cursor, or by keyboard shortcut keys  1, 2, 3.  8.2.   Album selection view  On the left, there is an album selection view with cover flow. On top of the album view  there’s library selection, search / category selection, and genre selection.  Library selection allows selection of backing music library. You can also select one of  the supported streaming services to browse and play music from a streaming service.  Currently supported streaming services are   Qobuz   and HRA Streaming by  highresaudio.com . Default view is My Albums, or new releases / top 50 in case My  Albums is empty. Search allows searching for content. On HRA Streaming service,  prefixing search string with character ‘?’ performs quick search action.  For local library, search strings of three characters or less are considered “ begins with ”  matches. Search strings longer than three are considered “ contains ” matches. Default  matching logic is logical “OR” operation, where match on any of the terms results in  positive match. By prefixing a word with a ‘+’ character, logic is changed to logical  “AND” operation for that item.  It is also possible to search for a specific type of item. Search string can be prefixed  with “album:”, “artist:”, “playlist:” or “track:”.  Genre selection works on local library, and on some selected streaming service  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Album selection view

51   /   60  categories depending on service’s functionality.  Clicking or tapping an album will select it for playback and return the view back to the  normal middle-view.  Double-click of an album will both load the album in transport and start playback.  Long-press on an album opens up following kind of popup window on album details.  From the album details view, album can be played immediately or queued for later  playback. Individual tracks can be also played immediately or queued for later  playback.  Album or track favorite status can be seen on, and changed, using the star button.  Clicking or tapping outside of the popup closes the popup window. Also Esc button on  keyboard closes the popup.  Qobuz dynamic content  To trigger playback of similar content based on entire album, long press of album play  button can be used. Long press of the album queue button will queue similar content  for later playback. Similarly, long press of a track play button will trigger playback of  similar content. And long press of a track queue button will queue similar content.  8.3.   Playlist edit view  On the right, there is a playlist edit view shown below.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Album details view

52   /   60  Going from left to right, there's an artist selection column, album selection column and  track selection column. The right-most column is the current playlist. Tracks can be  added or removed using the   +   and   –   keys below. Tracks can be also reordered by  using the up/down arrow buttons. Or the playlist can be cleared using the   C   button.  On top of the artist list, there’s a search entry for performing searches same way as  with the one in the album selection view.  Double-clicking an album, song or playlist entry will initiate immediate playback of the  item.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Playlist edit view

53   /   60  9.   Registering your copy  After purchasing a license key file will be provided. Store this file in a safe place. This  file can be installed by selecting “Register...” from the “Help” menu. Standard file open  dialog will appear asking to locate and select the license key file. Once the license key  file has been successfully installed, restart HQPlayer for the license to fully take effect.  Note!   Remember to back-up the license key file!  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

54   /   60  10.   Troubleshooting  This chapter explains some known workarounds and things which you can try, in case  of problems.  10.1.   Reporting bugs  In case you discover bugs, please enable log file functionality from the settings dialog,  try to reproduce the bug and send the log file together with a screen shot (PrtScn  button) to our support email address   support@signalyst.com   . On Windows the log file  can be found from %LOCALAPPDATA%\HQPlayer directory of the system drive. You  need to enter this path on the address bar of the Windows File Explorer as these are  not shown by default. On Linux and macOS, log file can be found from the hidden  ~/.hqplayer directory, where “~” denotes user's home directory. The log file is called  HQPlayer4Desktop.log.  10.2.   Sound problems with USB audio device  Default buffer size for USB audio devices is fairly small (10 ms) in Windows. This  sometimes causes various audio issues when some other process is loading the  system. If you experience such problems, increase size of the audio buffer by  changing the “Buffer time” setting in Settings-dialog. Good starting point is 100 ms.  10.3.   Generic  You might want to check that your selected sound device has exclusive mode enabled  in endpoint properties.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

55   /   60  With some buggy drivers it might also be necessary to change default format to match  the sample rate you are trying to use with HQPlayer.  10.4.   No rates available  In some cases, rate selection may stay empty. This means that there are no suitable  hardware sampling rates available for selected source material and resampling filter  combination. In this case, try selecting different resampling filter, such as “sinc”,  “minphase-sinc” or “none”.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.  Endpoint properties dialog

56   /   60  11.   Component licenses and trademarks  Following licenses apply for specified components.  11.1.   HQPlayer  HQPlayer End User License Agreement  CAREFULLY READ THE FOLLOWING LICENSE AGREEMENT. BY INSTALLING THE SOFTWARE  OR CLICKING ON THE "I AGREE" BUTTON, YOU ARE CONSENTING TO BE BOUND BY AND ARE  BECOMING A PARTY TO THIS AGREEMENT. IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO ALL OF THE TERMS OF  THIS AGREEMENT, CLICK THE "CANCEL" BUTTON, AND, IF APPLICABLE, UNINSTALL THE  SOFTWARE.  License Grant  The package contains software ("Software") and related explanatory written materials  ("Documentation"). "Software" includes any upgrades, modified versions, updates, additions and copies  of the Software. "You" means the person or company who is being licensed to use the Software or  Documentation. "We" and "us" means Jussi Laako, Signalyst.  This Software is licensed, not sold. We hereby grant you a nonexclusive license to use one copy of the  Software on any single computer, provided the Software is in use on only one computer at any time.  The Software is "in use" on a computer when it is loaded into temporary memory (RAM) or being  executed in other ways.  Title  We remain the owner of all right, title and interest in the Software and Documentation.  Archival or Backup Copies  You may either:  · make one copy of the Software solely for backup or archival purposes;  or  · transfer the Software to a single hard disk, provided you keep the  original solely for backup or archival purposes.  Things You May Not Do  The Software and Documentation are protected by Finnish copyright laws and international treaties. You  must treat the Software and Documentation like any other copyrighted material--for example a book.  You may not:  · copy the Documentation;  · copy the Software except to make archival or backup copies as  provided above;  · modify or adapt the Software or merge it into another program;  · reverse engineer, disassemble, decompile or make any attempt to  discover the source code of the Software, except solely for the  purpose of using modified versions of the Qt library or other LGPL libraries,  only to the extent required for this purpose;  · place the Software onto a server so that it is accessible via a  public network such as the Internet; or  · sublicense, rent, lease or lend any portion of the Software or  Documentation.  Trial Version  Limited time trial license is provided solely for the purpose of verifying that the Software and  Documentation is suitable for You and performs as expected, before purchasing a license. As the trial  license is provided for verification purposes, there is NO WARRANTY or REMEDY. After the limited trial  time, You agree to either stop using the Software and Documentation or purchase a license if You want  to continue using the Software and Documentation.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

57   /   60  Transfers  License is personal and You may NOT transfer any of your rights to use the Software or Documentation  to any another person or legal entity.  No Warranty  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JUSSI LAAKO / SIGNALYST ''AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR  IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF  MERCHANTABILITY, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE  DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL JUSSI LAAKO / SIGNALYST BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,  INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,  BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,  DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY  OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE  OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OR THE INABILITY TO USE OF THIS  SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  No employee, agent, dealer or distributor of ours is authorized to modify these terms, nor to make any  additional warranties.  Term and Termination  This license agreement takes effect upon your use of the software and remains effective until  terminated. You may terminate it at any time by destroying all copies of the Software and  Documentation in your possession. It will also automatically terminate if you fail to comply with any term  or condition of this license agreement. You agree on termination of this license to destroy all copies of  the Software and Documentation in your possession.  Confidentiality  The Software contains trade secrets and proprietary know-how that belong to us and it is being made  available to you in strict confidence. ANY USE OR DISCLOSURE OF THE SOFTWARE, OR OF ITS  ALGORITHMS, PROTOCOLS OR INTERFACES, OTHER THAN IN STRICT ACCORDANCE WITH  THIS LICENSE AGREEMENT, MAY BE ACTIONABLE AS A VIOLATION OF OUR TRADE SECRET  RIGHTS.  General Provisions  1. This written license agreement is the exclusive agreement between you and us concerning the  Software and Documentation and supersedes any and all prior oral or written agreements, negotiations  or other dealings between us concerning the Software.  2. This license agreement may be modified only by a writing signed by you and us.  3. In the event of litigation between you and us concerning the Software or Documentation, the litigation  will be held in District Court of Länsi-Uusimaa, Finland.  4. This license agreement is governed by the laws of Finland and international treaties.  5. You agree that the Software will not be shipped, transferred or exported into any country or used in  any manner prohibited by the laws of Finland or European Union or any other export laws, restrictions  or regulations.  11.2.   FLAC  Copyright (C) 2000-2009 Josh Coalson  Copyright (C) 2011-2023 Xiph.Org Foundation  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions  are met:  - Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  - Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

58   /   60  notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  - Neither the name of the Xiph.org Foundation nor the names of its  contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from  this software without specific prior written permission.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS  ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT  LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR  A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR  CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,  EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,  PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR  PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF  LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING  NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS  SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  11.3.   WavPack  Copyright (c) 1998 - 2023 David Bryant  All rights reserved.  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,  this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  * Neither the name of Conifer Software nor the names of its contributors  may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software  without specific prior written permission.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"  AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE  IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE  ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR  ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL  DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR  SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER  CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,  OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE  OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  11.4.   mpg123  HQPlayer Desktop uses unmodified version of libnpg123 library. mpg123 can be downloaded from  https://mpg123.de . Or alternatively from   https://www.signalyst.com/src/mpg123-1.32.3.tar.bz2 .  mpg123 is Copyright (c) 1995-2023 by Michael Hipp and others, free software under the terms of the  LGPL v2.1.  mpg123 is licensed under   GNU Lesser General Public License version 2.1  There is an attempt to cover the actual list of authors in the AUTHORS file.  Project maintainer since 2006 is Thomas Orgis and many people have contributed  since the Michael Hipp era, but he stays the initial source and it would  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

59   /   60  be impractical to count them all individually, so it's "and others".  Source files contain the phrase "the mpg123 project" to the same effect  in their license boilerplate; especially those that were added after  maintainership changed. The person mainly responsible for the first version  is usually named in the phrase "initially written by ...".  All files in the distribution that don't carry a license note on their own are  licensed under the terms of the LGPL 2.1; exceptions may apply, especially to  files not in the official distribution but in the revision control repository.  11.5.   ASIO  ASIO is a trademark and software of Steinberg Media Technologies GmbH.  11.6.   Qt  HQPlayer Desktop uses unmodified version of Qt library under commercial license. Qt can be  downloaded from   http://www.qt.io/   .  Qt is Copyright © 2024 The Qt Company Ltd.  On some platforms Qt may be licensed under   GNU Lesser General Public License version 3   with   The  Qt Company GPL Exception 1.0 .  Qt is a trademark of The Qt Company Ltd.  11.7.   libmicrohttpd  HQPlayer Desktop uses unmodified version of libmicrohttpd library. libmicrohttpd can be downloaded  from   https://www.gnu.org/software/libmicrohttpd/ . Or alternatively from  https://www.signalyst.com/src/libmicrohttpd-0.9.77.tar.gz .  libmicrohttpd is Copyright (C) 2006-2023 Christian Grothoff (and other contributing authors)  libmicrohttpd is licensed under   GNU Lesser General Public License version 2.1   or   eCos License .  11.8.   bs2b  Copyright (c) 2005 Boris Mikhaylov  Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining  a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the  "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including  without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,  distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to  permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to  the following conditions:  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be  included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,  EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF  MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.

60   /   60  CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,  TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE  SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.  11.9.   Botan  Botan ( http://botan.randombit.net/ ) is distributed under these terms:  Copyright (C) 1999-2023 The Botan Authors  All rights reserved.  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,  this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer.  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright  notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer in the  documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"  AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE  IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE  ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE  LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR  CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF  SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS  INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN  CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)  ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  11.10.   Trademarks  Signalyst is a registered trademark of Jussi Laako.  HQPlayer is a trademark of Jussi Laako.  All other trademarks are property of their respective owners.  Copyright   © 2008-2024 Jussi Laako / Signalyst. All rights reserved.